These are notes and code inspired by the book: "Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs)", edited by J. Parkinson, 2009, Humana Press and springer.com. 

ESTs are single-pass  short (usually <1000 bp) reads, derived fron cDNA clones; it is a highly cost-effective way to discover genes. It is valuable for genome annotation and as an alternative to microarray analysis, for finding relative levels of gene expression. NGS (in 2009) made it cost-effective for small labs also to undertake EST. 

Ch. 1: EST Overview: ESTs are fragments of mRNA sequences (often overlapping) that are expressed via combination with randomly selected clones from cDNA libraries. They represent expressed portion of a genome, from either a whole organism or specific tissues - hence very useful for novel gene discovery and verification of gene predictions. As of 2013 (not sure why no update since then), there were 74,186,692 entries in dbEST, of which 8,704,790 were human entries. dbEST accepts only single-pass reads, not assembled sequences. A noted inefficiency is the repeated sequencing of highly abundant mRNAs. So, methods exist to 'normalize' the relative abundance of each cDNA in the library. The db has been used to explore eukaryotic phylogeny. **Ch. 11 discusses AutoFACT pipeline for customizing a BLAST-based pipeline**. Functional annotation algorithms, perhaps based on HMM models, is feasible today (since AA/peptide annotations are available). In proteomics, peptide fragments are matched to known protein sequences using tandem mass spectrometry. But such known sequences are limited (as of 2009) and ESTs have been used to id and characterize alternative splicing events, difficult to predict from the raw genome sequence. **Ch. 15 discusses current applications of ESTs in human disease.** 

Ch. 11: EST Databases and Web Tools for EST Projects: Focus is on the design of an EST database for a specific EST project. Uses TBestDB (of protists; Taxonomically-Broad eukaryote EST DB). Uses PostgresSQL, Perl, PHP to build the db and interface; AutoFACT for data processing and annotation. .... P. 249: Identifying the protein sequence that corresponds to a consensus (or contig) EST sequence is challenging. Assigne function to an unknown seq by similarity search aainst seqs of known functions, as performed with BLAST. Some are 'hyopthetical protein' - not very useful. AutoFACT is particularly useful for investigating new taxa. Written in Perl for Linux. Input is nucleotide sequence and conducts BLAST  search against miulitple dbs. Error rate <2%. Other tools: SpliceNest visualizes gene structure and alternative splicing based on EST clusters. Others: GEPSIS and SimiTri. 

Ch. 15: ESTs in Human Health. Past 10 years- complete characterization of the human transcriptome, to (1) id of all human genes, (2) transcriptome variability,  (3) spatial and temporal expression patterns of transcripts and variants, and (4) the association of transcripts and variants with complex biological phenomena, such as diseases. **High throughput technologies (EST, SAGE, MPSS, and microarrays) have made this feasible.** Some tissues from mammalian species are underrepresented in GenBank as well as several pathological situations. In theory, ESTs can be used to evaluate the level of expression of a given message. But libraries are normailzed. Also, SAGE and microarrays are more quantitative. ESTs are widely used to detect transcript variability (mainly alternative splicing -- **Alu**). **Sim4** is a precise algorithm of alignment that identifies exon/intron borders more precisely. **See Refs {1,2,3] below**. 

**cDNAs from the RefSeq** [initiative](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/) report splicing variants for a significant fraction of all human genes. Full length cDNA sequences (classified as **mRNAs in GenBank**) also can help with reliable id of splicing variants. **ESTs and Disease**: Most of the interest has been with cancer; but other diseases are targeted as well. A very useful app of ESTs is positional cloning, i.e., the id of particular genes involved in the phenotype of a given disease soley based on their genomic location. E.g., retinopathy, where uncloned genes but mapped genes were identified. ESTs can also id genes differentially expressed in a given disease state. **UniGene** has a useful tool to evaluate if a given tissue and/or disease state is differentially represented in a cluster. In each UniGene cluster entry, there is a link for "Expression Profile" which shows a breakdown by tissue and by health state for all cDNAs in that cluster. But, genes differentially expressed are more reliably ID-ed by quantitative approaches (SADEW, MPSS, and microarrays) - reason: normalized EST libraries and **lower transcript coverage within EST libraries** -- looks like because of expression levels would be different for different genes and some of them will be too low to be identified reliably. 

pp.318: Computational and statisticla methods used in the analyses are not sensitive enough to discriminate the expression level of all variants from a given gene. The critical issue is to discriminate transcription from splicing regulation. Author of this chapter used SAGE and finally identified ~1300 splicing variants putatively associated with cancer. Experimental validation for a subset of those candidate genes was achieved for both tumor cell lines and patient samples. There was an alternative splicing database maintained by EBI. Now (as of 2018), **alternative splicing data** has been incorporated into the Ensembl and Ensembl Genomes projects, which offer access to genomic data from vertebrate and non-vertebrate species respectively. Also, **check genome browsers available**, such as that at [UCSC](https://genome.ucsc.edu/), [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mapview/), or [Ensembl](https://useast.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Info/Index). The author of this chapter applied an integrative view of the teranscriptome to id new genes on chromosomes 22, 21 and at the Herditrary Prostate Cancer Locus 1 (Hpc1) on Chromosome 1q25.They developed a "Transcript Finishing Initiative" in which they used the genome sequence as a scaffod for EST mapping and clustering. They then performed RT-PCR to bridge gap between EST clusters that are likely derived from the same gene. This strategy efficiently discovered new genes and splicing isoforms. See Ref 4. They have also worked on an *in silico* protocol for the id of genes differentially expressed in cancer by using ESTs and SAGE. See Ref 5.  

**Craig Venter (1991)** used EST in their breakthrough process.  From [wik](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Craig_Venter): In 2014 **Venter** co-founded [Human Longevity, Inc.](https://www.humanlongevity.com/), a company focused on extending the healthy, "high performance" human lifespan. The company said that it plans to sequence 40,000 genomes per year, with an initial focus on cancer genomes and the genomes of cancer patients. Human Longevity's mission is to extend healthy human lifespan by the use of high-resolution big data diagnostics from genomics, metabolomics, microbiomics, and proteomics, and the use of stem cell therapy. See this [article](http://www.lifeextension.com/Magazine/2014/11/Massive-Database-Planned-To-Crack-The-Secrets-Of-Aging/Page-01) in **LifeExtension magazine**. By sequencing the genomes of people who are healthy, sick, young, and old, the database is expected to eventually offer insights into the aging process. They will also collect the clinical medical history of every individual whose genome it sequences. Each participant’s complex data can be intricately compared with critical medical information. First, Venter plans to deliver predictive and preventive medicine on a revolutionary scale by discovering the very earliest warning signs for susceptibility to chronic illnesses such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, and **heart disease**.

Glossary of terms:
* EST - Expressed Sequence Tag
* NGS - Next Generation Sequencing
* cDNA - Complementary DNA
* [dbEST](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/) - public EST database resource
* SAGE - Serial Analysis of Gene Expression
* MPSS - Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing

References:
1. Galante et al., 2004: Detection and evaluation of intron retention events in the human transcriptome. *Rna*, vol. 10, pp. 757-765
2. Modrek et al., 2003: Alternative splicing in the human, mouse, and rate genomes is associated with an increased frequency of exon creation and/or loss. *Nat Genet*, vol. 34, pp. 177-180
3. Florea et al., 1998: A computer program for aligning a cDNA sequence with a genomic DNA sequence, *Genome Res*, vol 8, pp. 967-974.
4. Spgayar, et al.,2004: A transcript finishing initiative for closing gaps in the human transcriptome, *Genome Res*, vol 14, pp. 1413-1423. 
5. Leerkes et al., 2002: In Silico comparison of transcriptome derived from purified normal breast cells and breast tumor cell lines reveals candidate upregulated genes in breast tumor cells. *Genomics*, vol. 79, pp. 257-265.
